Usually, the language that we learn from infancy becomes the language of the heart.
And we learn it at home.
In most cases, the dominant influence in our life, in connection with our language of heart
or the first language, is our mother.
And that's precisely what took place in Israel, in the days of Nehemiah.
But the mothers, in this case, were pagans, sharing their language and probably their beliefs
with their children.
And a lot of Jewish men, prominent Jewish men, had married pagan women.
Let's read the scripture together at Nehemiah, chapter 13, verses 23 and 24.
Nehemiah 13, 23 and 24.
In those days, I also saw Jews who had married Ashtadite, Ammonite, and Moabite women.
Half of their sons were speaking Ashtadite and the language of the different peoples.
But none of them knew how to speak the language of the Jews.
And as was stated, it's very likely that those mothers would be teaching the children
about their land, their culture, and their worship, the pagan gods, their worship.
And so the decision was made by the Jews themselves when they were counseled and given direction
from Ezra and from Nehemiah to send those wives away along with the children.
And that's an interesting thing.
It must have been a bit difficult for some husbands to see their children sent away.
All they knew were the languages of the pagan wives, nothing about Hebrew and the worship
of Jehovah God.
And the problem was, they were sent away to keep the Jews from losing their identity.
By a gradual assimilation into the cultures and the religions of the surrounding nations,
that those wives belong to.
In Nehemiah's day, speaking Hebrew was vital, and we're grateful it's not necessary today.
We all don't have to learn Hebrew.
But in his wisdom, Jehovah invites people who speak any language to learn the pure language,
the truth about him and his purposes.
And you know, it's a bit, it's like the opposite of what took place at the Tower of Babel,
where Jehovah intervened, confused the builders of the Tower of Babel, imposing upon them different
languages, including different ways of thinking.
And so they went off, disorganized, separating from one another.
And today we have people from all over the world who speak many, many different languages,
but in Jehovah's wisdom, he's bringing them all together, those who love the truth and
love him in unity.
And this is what Zephaniah says, Zephaniah chapter 3 verse 9, it speaks of the pure language.
I shall give to peoples the change to a pure language.
In order for them all to call upon the name of Jehovah, and that's what these people
do, who speak other languages, we reach them with the truth, but then they're unified
with Jehovah's organization, because it goes on to say, in order to serve him, shoulder
to shoulder.
So isn't that interesting?
The way Jehovah has used the pure language to bring people of many diverse backgrounds
and languages together in his worship.
In our days, people in many different languages are leaving their home countries to live elsewhere.
And it's really quite amazing when you consider large cities are filled with people of different
languages.
And even little villages, we find people speaking different languages.
They need help to learn the truth in the language of their heart.
It's interesting to note about Bethelites, how many have learned other languages in order
to teach the truth to people.
In the United States, Bethel, in our branch, there are over 2,500 Bethelites who are engaged
in congregations, 24 different language groups and congregations.
So a lot of Bethelites and commuters are included in those numbers, are doing a very fine work
in helping people in the territory to learn the truth.
And wouldn't it be nice, I know some of us would love to learn some other languages?
Wouldn't it be lovely if we could learn the way a child does?
They just absorb it.
No effort, and they start speaking it.
A researcher, Dr. John Breerley, says this, clearly the young brain seems to be programmed
almost like a computer for language development.
He notes that even brain anatomy suggests that an infant is born with a pre-programmed
biological capacity to speak.
And then comment, the comment in a wake said, it says, though the brain is hardwired to
learn language, I'm sorry to say that as the years go, as the years go by, the hardwiring
starts to fray a bit in many of us.
But if we make the effort and we do make a switch to a congregation where they speak the
language, where you would like to learn, remember this, children can be a big help in the
congregation that you attend in a foreign language.
They can also be very startling, and Frank, you speak funny.
Why can't you pronounce that word properly?
It's so easy.
Well, yes, to you it's easy, you were raised with it, but that's how kids are.
They don't realize the difficulties we have as we get older with the grooves being so
deep and so thick in the brain with our original language that it's hard to get out of those
grooves with vowels and consonants that we're not used to saying in a certain order.
Keep a sense of humor, listen to the kids, they'll help you, and don't be overly concerned
about speaking a new language without an accent.
Everybody has an accent, one way or another, some are more agreeable than others, but everyone
has that.
So, and some don't want to admit it, but they really do, they have an accent.
Even when we all speak the same language, you can tell who our person is from, whether
it's East, North, West, whatever it may be, South, there are accents or intonations the
way words are pronounced.
I remember years gone by for missionaries who were sent out into the field.
We had to follow a special program in learning a new language, your first month in your new
assignment, you had to study 11 hours a day for 30 days, your first month, your
new language.
Well you felt like you were in the tower of Babel on those occasions because it was very
difficult.
The second month you had to study your new language four hours a day and be out preaching
130 hours.
Your third month, 150 hours in the field ministry and study language as you can.
For those who are striving to learn a new language, here are a few suggestions I gleaned
from a wake of March 2007 and the January issue of 2000, there are four points.
One, motivation, two, humility, three, patience, four, practice.
Motivation, you need an incentive, a reason to pursue your goal because if you have a high
level of motivation, you're going to be more successful.
We have the best motivation there is.
Teach people the truth.
Praise our God, Jehovah, build up the congregation we've chosen to attend.
What about humility?
Well, don't expect too much of yourself when you start learning a new language.
Mistakes are inevitable and if you wait until you can speak it perfectly before you start
making comments or give a talk, you may be waiting quite a while, be prepared because
it may not be until after Armageddon that you achieve that goal.
So don't be afraid to make mistakes and carry on with your new language.
Patients, a brother stated, for me the first two years were difficult and at times I felt
like giving up.
Still he acknowledges it does get easier as time goes by and he gets enjoyable.
In number four, practice.
A regular routine will help you to become fluent in your new language.
Try to practice every day, even if it's for just a few minutes.
There's an interesting saying as one textbook puts it.
A little and often is preferable to a lot but sell them.
So be steady, even for short periods of time in practicing the new language.
Now the fact is that most Bethelites in our branch are serving in the English language
field and they are truly a blessing to the congregations.
The brothers are happy to have Bethelites who take the lead, who give of themselves and
work hard to build up the congregation.
So the decision to serve in an English congregation or with a different language group is highly
personal.
Whatever the decision may be, there's a key factor that we all have to keep
in mind to maintain our spirituality at a high level and giving our Bethel assignment
our best.
And that key factor that we have to keep in mind is to focus on the one language that
counts the most, the pure language that Jehovah God has given to His people.